Introduction to Programming with Python – Lecture Notes
1. The Power of Programming
Modern computers can perform repetitive and time-consuming tasks in seconds—if we know how to give them the right instructions. Even basic programming knowledge can dramatically reduce manual work. A task that takes hours or days for a person can be automated with just a few lines of code.

Real-Life Example
In the early 2000s, a simple script saved employees hours by comparing store prices in minutes. This highlights how computers can efficiently handle tedious data tasks.

2. Who Should Learn Programming?
This course isn't just for aspiring professional developers. If you:

Work in an office,

Manage files and spreadsheets,

Collect online data,

Or want to make your digital life easier,

...then this course is for you.

You’ll learn how to automate repetitive tasks like:

Renaming or sorting large groups of files

Filling out forms automatically

Scraping data from websites

Sending automated notifications

Processing spreadsheets and emails

Managing basic databases

Extracting text from media

3. Learning Style of This Course
This course focuses on beginner-friendly learning:

You’ll write code that works, even if it’s not always the most optimized.

Some advanced topics (like object-oriented programming) are skipped at first to keep things simple.

Simplicity and practical use come before technical complexity.

4. What is Programming?
Programming means writing step-by-step instructions for the computer. Basic patterns include:

Doing one thing after another

Making decisions using “if/else”

Repeating tasks a set number of times

Looping until a condition is met

Even without experience, you can often understand what a small program does just by reading it.

Programming combines logic and creativity—similar to building with LEGO or creating art. The major difference is: software can be duplicated endlessly and shared with the world.

5. Why Python?
Python is both:

A language, which defines how we write instructions,

And an interpreter, the software that runs those instructions.

Python is widely recommended for beginners because:

It’s easy to read and understand,

It allows you to write useful programs without deep technical knowledge,

It’s widely used in data analysis, web development, automation, and more.

Fun fact: The name "Python" comes from Monty Python, not the snake.

6. Programming Myths Debunked
❌ "You need to be good at math."
While some programming fields involve math, most daily programming tasks require logic and pattern recognition, not advanced mathematics. It’s more like solving a Sudoku than doing calculus.

❌ "I'm too old to start learning."
You’re never too old to learn to code. Many people start in their 30s, 40s, or beyond. It’s more about consistency than age.

❌ "AI will replace programmers."
AI tools can help with coding, but they make mistakes and require human oversight. Learning programming gives you the power to use these tools wisely and avoid being misled by them.

7. Setting Up Your Tools
Install Python
Visit: python.org

Download and install Python for your operating system (Windows, macOS, or Linux)

Install Mu Editor
Visit: codewith.mu

Mu is a beginner-friendly editor to write and run Python code

On first launch, choose “Python 3” mode

Using IDLE (Alternative Editor)
IDLE is included with Python

It's a simple environment for writing and testing code

8. Running Your First Code
To test if everything works, open Mu or IDLE and type:

python
Copy
Edit
print('Hello, world!')
This prints a message to your screen. Congratulations—you’ve just written your first line of code!

9. Understanding Errors
Mistakes happen, and they’re part of learning. Python gives you messages when things go wrong. These errors might look confusing at first, but they’re valuable clues.

For example:

python
Copy
Edit
'42' + 3
This causes an error because Python can’t combine text and numbers directly. Look up the exact error message online to find explanations and solutions.

10. Where to Get Help
✅ Search for the full error message
Copy the message into Google or a site like Stack Overflow.

✅ Ask Smart Questions
When asking others for help:

Clearly explain what you’re trying to do

Share your code and the error messages

Mention your system (Windows/macOS/Linux) and Python version

List the steps you’ve already tried

✅ Recommended Communities
Stack Overflow

r/learnprogramming

r/inventwithpython

11. What’s New in This Edition
This updated edition adds practical projects like:

Controlling browsers with Playwright or Selenium

Creating and querying databases

Working with PDFs and images

Extracting text from videos, images, and audio

Building command line tools

Generating graphs

12. Final Thoughts
Most people use computers only as tools, but by learning programming, you turn your computer into a powerful assistant. You don’t need special equipment—just curiosity and patience. Mistakes are part of the journey, and the more you practice, the more confident you’ll become.

Remember: Programming isn’t about being perfect. It’s about problem-solving, learning, and making the computer work for you.

Let’s get started!